Two other things before actually
starting to analyze how to improve
performance now that we understand
roughly how everything works.
Typically, let's simplify a website a lot.
We have HTML, we have JavaScript,
and we have CSS, okay?
That's the minimum.
What I'm not sure if you know is that CSS,
let's start with JavaScript.
JavaScript blocks parsing by default,
which means the browser
is reading the HTML.
If the browser encounters a JavaScript,
it will stop parsing, so
it will not read the rest of the HTML.
Let me show you this in action.
In our Frontend Museum, example,
when you look at the HTML,
parsing is about reading, let's say,
line by line and analyzing the code,
understanding the elements, and creating
the DOM, the document object model.
Well, here, for example, on line four,
it gets into a script tag.
Well, because there is a script there,
it will block the parsing.
So it's not going to read the meta or
the rest of the HTML until that
JavaScript file is downloaded and
executed, which is pretty bad for
performance.
In the network layer, Let me refresh so
we can get the full waterfall.
Let me get off of the screenshot so
we have more space, like so.
We could see at some point,
I'm not sure if it's easy to see here,
but maybe here, that logo.png file
didn't start the download process,
Before the script finishes downloading.
Can you see that?
So that's typically a case of,
A problem like this.
For example, if I open my index.html and
I have more scripts like so,
I can even add the hack like this,
you will see how performance
gets worse and worse,
because it will wait for this one.
It's not going to download more files
in parallel, it will go in sequence,
one by one.
That was ten years ago,
there was best practice in web
development that was saying,
move all your script to the end.
Have you seen that?
That is both because let's
defer that to the end so
we don't block the rendering, okay?
Anyway, we'll get into that in a second.
So JavaScript blocks parsing and
rendering goes after parsing.
So if we are blocking parsing,
we're also blocking rendering,
we are pushing rendering.
CSS blocks rendering, which means
the browser will never render a pixel on
the screen if all the CSS that is known at
that moment was not downloaded and parsed.
Even CSS that is not going
to be applied right now, or
even if the CSS it has a media query and
the media query is currently false,
it's going to download everything.
It's going to parse the CSS, and
only at that moment it will start
rendering things on the screen.
And we know that most of the core
web vitals has to do with rendering,
with seeing things on the screen.
Well, and the last thing is frames and
interactivity.
That is just showing you this
particular slide diagram
that has to do with animation.
So after the page was loaded,
the browser has an animation loop,
even if nothing moves on the page,
there is an animation loop.
When you scroll with your finger,
with your phone, you scroll,
that's an animation loop going on.
So there is always an animation.
And the animation renders a frame,
and then it analyzes input events.
Input events is, have you scrolled, have
you clicked, is your mouse over something?
So every event that you have in
JavaScript can be an input event.
After parsing those events, and that's
actually your code, your JavaScript code.
When your JavaScript code releases the
thread, then the browser parses the HTML,
styles, and layout in case you have
changed something or in case you have
moved the page and there is something
else that needs to be analyzed.
Then it goes into paints and
composite, and
maybe there is an idle time
before the next frame.
And it's doing that, for example, 60
times per second, Okay, that's the idea.
The problem is, what happens if your
JavaScript code is taking a second
to execute?
We have a problem because we are pushing
the rest because it's only one thread.
So that means the animation will be bad,
you won't get 60 frames per seconds,
and you get into performance penalties,
okay?
So this is just, again,
just how the browser works.